# A.C. Operations Manual

A brief description of some of my quirks and how best to manage them within a
professional environment.

## Actuation

### Fundamental Motivations

People do things [because they want to](./laying_bricks.md). I choose the work I
do to:

- Learn things.
- Build cool stuff.
- Help out those around me.

If you want to get me to do something, those are the levers you lean on.

### Do Ask

I *like* helping.

Peers, if you have a problem and you want my help with it, please ask. It is
technically possible for you to become a nuisance by coming to me with too many
questions too frequently, but the risk is low and you will be informed if it
happens.

Leadership, I care about you less, but if you're within a single remove of the
actual work (i.e., if you are running the line or are directly above that) I
will still be positively disposed toward you.

### Don't Demand

I exhibit high degrees of
[reactance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reactance_(psychology)), and tend to
respond negatively to direct commands. Peers, your directives will be laughed
at. Superiors, yours will result in morale problems. Moreover, they represent a
strong indicator that you are doing something quite wrong. The previous two
sections should keep our incentives aligned without anything so heavyweight as
orders.

### Asking to Ask

When asking me for something, especially over chat, please ask it straight out
and only if you're available to actual work through it then and
there. [Ovsiankina](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ovsiankina_effect) has a
terrible hold over me, and I will struggle to focus on anything else until
whatever it is you need from me has been processed.

More succinctly, don't ask to ask me things. Just ask.

- Good: "Hey, I can't seem to connect to port 1234 on my `foo` container. I've
  done X, Y, Z so far. Any ideas?"
- Bad: "Hey, question about docker." --> "What's up?" --> Five minutes of
  is-typing notifications.
- *AWFUL*: "Hey got a minute? I have a question about docker." --> disappears
  into meetings for several hours.

## Orchestration

### Load Shedding

I am really quite bad about delegating or otherwise dumping work, even when I
hit an overload state. Managers, one of your principle functions is ensuring
that I don't stay overloaded for so long that I fall apart completely.

### Work Estimation

My work estimates are almost always rubbish, [as
expected](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hofstadter%27s_law), but they are
particularly bad when the task is conceptually simple or easy.

Easy is not fast. Easy is not fast. Easy is not fast. I know it, but history
suggests that I still don't *know* it.

## Communication

### This is (not|) a Hint

The ask-don't-demand behavioral pattern previously described is common among
engineers, an unfortunate consequence of which is that questions sometimes scan
as veiled statements.

In cases where such ambiguity seems particularly undesirable, I may note that
"This is not a hint" (or less frequently, that it *is*). The statement means
exactly what it says.

### Advocatus Diaboli

I care very much about the quality of arguments. The conclusions that shake out
at the end, meh.

In practice this means that I am likely to interrogate lines of reasoning and
underlying assumptions, or to present contrary positions, even when I suspect
that we may already be on an quite good enough path. I *may* remember to
announce myself as a devil's advocate beforehand.

This sometimes confuses or offends people, but it's not going to stop. You don't
do math or science to show yourself right, [you do it to become
right](https://xkcd.com/701/).

### Write it, Read It

I adore the written word. It is persistent. It is discoverable. It can be
interruptive or not, at the author's discretion. Composition can clarify not
only the communicated message but also the author's own thinking. 

Information bandwidth or social necessity may indicate toward other media in
some cases, but as a default I will tend to write things down.

I generally expect that my peers read written messages about as reliably as they
hear spoken ones.

### Feedback: Explicit, Timely, Constructive

If I am doing something wrong, or could be doing it better, please tell me. I
will endeavor to receive it as dispassionately as possible.

When giving feedback, please ensure that it is:

1. Explicit: Subtle hints will not register. You have to tell me outright.
1. Timely: There is a rule of thumb in canine obedience that reward stimulus
   should be delivered within three seconds of the desired behavior. I credit
   myself with a somewhat longer attention than the average hound; as many as
   three hours might pass before instruction is wasted.
   - Corollary: I take a very dim view of annual or semi-annual performance
     processes.
1. Constructive: I am more likely to make real improvement if you package a
   loss-gradient together with the critique.

This is bog standard, but important enough warrant the added emphasis.

### Running Roughshod

I offer questions and express opinions quite readily in engineering discussions,
moreso than many of my peers. This poses a conch hogging risk, which I am aware
of and actively attempt to manage. If you observe me monopolizing the floor or
otherwise running roughshod over other discussion participants, please tell me.
