# Laying Bricks

## TL;DR

If you're a manager or team lead and your team members can tell you, off the
tops of their heads, why the work they do is important, then you're doing
something wrong.

Neither "this will make the company a bajillion dollars" nor "some bigwig
somewhere cares a lot about this" are particularly good justifications.

## Motivation

There are only two reasons people do things:

1. They want to.
2. They meant to do something else, but screwed up.

Engineers are people, so if we want to get them to do something we either need
to make them want to do it or trick them into doing it anyways. The latter
option is in most scenarios both unethical and ineffective, so the problem
reduces to that of creating appropriate motivators. The number of different
incentives which can be deployed are myriad, but can be broken into two
categories: intrinsic and extrinsic.

Intrinsic motivators are inherent to the task itself. Engineers specifically are
likely to find value in the challenge of cracking a tricky problem, or in sating
their curiosity at how a peculiar system works. People generally like to do
things that matter, and though definitions of what matters are not uniform, they
are not wholly random. We would suggest that tasks which are helpful, beautiful,
or impressive are likely to inspire broadly; nobody needs further justification
for feeding a starving man, or for composing a symphony, or for climbing a
towering mountain, except that he could.

Extrinsic motivators, meanwhile, are separate from the task but contingent on
its completion. In a workplace these usually come in two forms. The first,
money, is obvious: people get fired if they stop showing up or start slacking
off, top performers may be eligible for bonuses or raises, and so on. The second,
face/status, is only slightly less obvious. Managers, unless they are downright
terrible at their jobs, praise their team members when they do something
exceptional and are certain to do it where others can see. Many companies have
awards that they hand out to members of particularly successful projects before
trotting them up on stage to have their heads patted in front of everyone.

It is common to look at intrinsic motivators as somehow more pure or noble than
their crass extrinsic cousins. That may or may not be, but it is not our purpose
here to render any sort of moral judgement. It is, however, important to note
that extrinsic motivators are prone to
[treadmill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hedonic_treadmill) effects, and that
they can actually [degrade
performance](https://www.ted.com/talks/dan_pink_the_puzzle_of_motivation) on
many of the sorts of tasks that you would hire engineers for.

## Morale

Let's assume for a moment that we've done nothing to motivate our team aside
from giving them a paycheck, and that the problem we're putting them on is
boring and uninspiring. If we also assume that we've hired a halfway decent team
of engineers, then we *can* depend on the team's discipline and professionalism
to push through and get it done. The catch, though, is that our strategy will
slowly drain morale, which in turn will eat away at productivity and drive up
attrition.

That's probably not what we want, so what are our options for providing
additional motivation to our engineers? Extrinsic motivators have their uses,
but their susceptibility to treadmill effects makes them a particularly
difficult tool to use for long-term motivation. We can't always depend on the
work being interesting -- real projects always involve some amount of drudgery,
and usually more than we'd like. Of the forms of motivation discussed, that
leaves only purpose arguments.

Core to our ability to generate motivation from project purpose is the fact that
different formulations of the same task can create wildly different degrees of
engagement. The canonical example of this is the mason working towards the
construction of a magnificent cathedral. If someone asked him what he does at
work he could say that he lays bricks, or that he builds cathedrals, and in both
cases be equally truthful. The motivational distinction between the two is
stark, however, is stark. If we can create an analog to the cathedral
formulation for our project, and keep it clear in everybody's minds we can solve
much of our motivational challenge.

It may seem that this is a trivial endeavor that doesn't require any special
care on the part of leadership, especially if we focus hard on the bricks and
cathedrals example. It is, after all, fairly obvious if you're building walls in
a cathedral. Two things complicate this in practice. First, it is still valid
for the mason to describe his work as the laying of bricks, and it's entirely
possible that he hasn't spent any time thinking about which formulation he finds
more motivating. Second, software is stupid complicated these days. If you ask a
programmer what the ultimate use of her work is there's a good chance she'll
shrug her shoulders and say "I dunno, [porn probably](https://xkcd.com/1629/)"
-- not the proudest of monuments.

Now, there is still one last wrinkle to be ironed out: we may not ourselves have a strong
impression of a project's purpose, even though we are in charge of
it. The first thing we ought to do in such a case is question the premise:
perhaps the project isn't worth the time and should be scrapped or reworked. Or,
perhaps we didn't have the whole picture, and our inquiries can uncover it for
us.

In the worst case there may a good reason, but only from a very particular
perspective. Most commonly this takes the shape of a project which stands to
make somebody a tremendous sum of money. Or, nearly equivalently, someone with a
lot of organizational clout may have decreed that the work is important. Neither
of those counts for shit down where the iron flies, except insofar as it can
affect career prospects (i.e. it may be possible to squeeze some extrinsic
incentives out of them). The best we can do if that's our project's only
justification is to (1) be honest with your team about the project's ignoble
nature and (2) be cognizant of the fact that we're probably burning morale to
make it happen.
